When I did wake, to a beautiful sunny morning, I leapt out of bed with
my over-night apprehension still clinging to me, which vanished
delightfully however in a moment as I looked around my little sleeping
chamber and saw the pale but pure-coloured figures painted on the
plaster of the wall, with verses written underneath them which I knew
somewhat over well. I dressed speedily, in a suit of blue laid ready for
me, so handsome that I quite blushed when I had got into it, feeling as
I did so that excited pleasure of anticipation of a holiday, which, well
remembered as it was, I had not felt since I was a boy, new come home
for the summer holidays.

It seemed quite early in the morning, and I expected to have the hall to
myself when I came into it out of the corridor wherein was my sleeping
chamber; but I met Annie at once, who let fall her broom and gave me a
kiss, quite meaningless I fear, except as betokening friendship, though
she reddened as she did it, not from shyness, but from friendly
pleasure, and then stood and picked up her broom again, and went on with
her sweeping, nodding to me as if to bid me stand out of the way and
look on; which, to say the truth, I thought amusing enough, as there
were five other girls helping her, and their graceful figures engaged in
the leisurely work were worth going a long way to see, and their merry
talk and laughing as they swept in quite a scientific manner was worth
going a long way to hear. But Annie presently threw me back a word or
two as she went on to the other end of the hall: "Guest," she said, "I
am glad that you are up early, though we wouldn't disturb you; for our
Thames is a lovely river at half-past six on a June morning: and as it
would be a pity for you to lose it, I am told just to give you a cup of
milk and a bit of bread outside there, and put you into the boat: for
Dick and Clara are all ready now. Wait half a minute till I have swept
down this row."

So presently she let her broom drop again, and came and took me by the
hand and led me out on to the terrace above the river, to a little table
under the boughs, where my bread and milk took the form of as dainty a
breakfast as any one could desire, and then sat by me as I ate. And in a
minute or two Dick and Clara came to me, the latter looking most fresh
and beautiful in a light silk embroidered gown, which to my unused eyes
was extravagantly gay and bright; while Dick was also handsomely dressed
in white flannel prettily embroidered. Clara raised her gown in her
hands as she gave me the morning greeting, and said laughingly: "Look,
guest! you see we are at least as fine as any of the people you felt
inclined to scold last night; you see we are not going to make the
bright day and the flowers feel ashamed of themselves. Now scold me!"

Quoth I: "No, indeed; the pair of you seem as if you were born out of
the summer day itself; and I will scold you when I scold it."

"Well, you know," said Dick, "this is a special day---all these days
are, I mean. The hay-harvest is in some ways better than corn-harvest
because of the beautiful weather; and really, unless you had worked in
the hay-field in fine weather, you couldn't tell what pleasant work it
is. The women look so pretty at it, too," he said, shyly; "so all things
considered, I think we are right to adorn it in a simple manner."

"Do the women work at it in silk dresses?" said I, smiling.

Dick was going to answer me soberly; but Clara put her hand over his
mouth, and said, "No, no, Dick; not too much information for him, or I
shall think that you are your old kinsman again. Let him find out for
himself: he will not have long to wait."

"Yes," quoth Annie, "don't make your description of the picture too
fine, or else he will be disappointed when the curtain is drawn. I don't
want him to be disappointed. But now it's time for you to be gone, if
you are to have the best of the tide, and also of the sunny morning.
Good-bye, guest."

She kissed me in her frank friendly way, and almost took away from me my
desire for the expedition thereby; but I had to get over that, as it was
clear that so delightful a woman would hardly be without a due lover of
her own age. We went down the steps of the landing stage, and got into a
pretty boat, not too light to hold us and our belongings comfortably,
and handsomely ornamented; and just as we got in, down came Boffin and
the weaver to see us off. The former had now veiled his splendour in a
due suit of working clothes, crowned with a fantail hat, which he took
off, however, to wave us farewell with his grave old-Spanish-like
courtesy. Then Dick pushed off into the stream, and bent vigorously to
his sculls, and Hammersmith, with its noble trees and beautiful
water-side houses, began to slip away from us.

As we went, I could not help putting beside his promised picture of the
hay-field as it was then the picture of it as I remembered it, and
especially the images of the women engaged in the work rose up before
me: the row of gaunt figures, lean, flat-breasted, ugly, without a grace
of form or face about them; dressed in wretched skimpy print gowns, and
hideous flapping sun-bonnets, moving their rakes in a listless
mechanical way. How often had that marred the loveliness of the June day
to me; how often had I longed to see the hay-fields peopled with men and
women worthy of the sweet abundance of midsummer, of its endless wealth
of beautiful sights, and delicious sounds and scents. And now, the world
had grown old and wiser, and I was to see my hope realised at last!
